WHEN SUSAN CALVIN RETURNED FROM HYPER BASE, Alfred Tanning was waiting for her.
The old man never spoke about his age, but everyone knew it to be over seventy-five. Yet
his mind was keen, and if he had finally allowed himself to be made Director-Emeritus of
Research with Bogert as acting Director, it did not prevent him from appearing in his
office daily.
 “How close are they to the Hyperatomic Drive?” he asked.
 “I don’t know,” she replied irritably, “I didn’t ask.”
 “Hmm. I wish they’d hurry. Because if they don’t, Consolidated might beat them
to it, and beat us to it as well.”
 “Consolidated. What have they got to do with it?”
 “Well, we’re not the only ones with calculating machines. Ours may be
positronic, but that doesn’t mean they’re better. Robertson is calling a big meeting about
it tomorrow. He’s been waiting for you to come back.”
 Robertson of U. S. Robot & Mechanical Men Corporation, son of the founder,
pointed his lean nose at his general manager and his Adam’s apple jumped as he said,
“You start now. Let’s get this straight.”
 The general manager did so with alacrity, “Here’s the deal now, chief.
Consolidated Robots approached us a month ago with a funny sort of proposition. They
brought about five tons of figures, equations, all that sort of stuff. It was a problem, see,
and they wanted an answer from The Brain. The terms were as follows--”
 He ticked them off on thick fingers: “A hundred thousand for us if there is no
solution and we can tell them the missing factors. Two hundred thousand if there is a
solution, plus costs of construction of the machine involved, plus quarter interest in all
profits derived therefrom. The problem concerns the development of an interstellar
engine--”
 Robertson frowned and his lean figure stiffened, “Despite the fact that they have a
thinking machine of their own. Right?”
 “Exactly what makes the whole proposition a foul ball, chief? Levver, take it from
there.”
 Abe Levver looked up from the far end of the conference table and smoothed his
stubbled chin with a faint rasping sound. He smiled:
 “It’s this way, sir. Consolidated had a thinking machine. It’s broken.”
 “What?” Robertson half rose.
 “That’s right. Broken! It’s kaput. Nobody knows why, but I got hold of some
pretty interesting guesses -- like, for instance, that they asked it to give them an
interstellar engine with the same set of information they came to us with, and that it
cracked their machine wide open. It’s scrap -- just scrap now.”
 “You get it, chief?” The general manager was wildly jubilant. “You get it? There
isn’t any industrial research group of any size that isn’t trying to develop a space-warp
engine, and Consolidated and U. S. Robots have the lead on the field with our super
robot-brains. Now that they’ve managed to foul theirs up, we have a clear field. That’s
the nub, the... uh... motivation. It will take them six years at least to build another and
they’re sunk, unless they can break ours, too, with the same problem.”
 The president of U. S. Robots bulged his eyes, “Why, the dirty rats--”
 “Hold on, chief. There’s more to this.” He pointed a finger with a wide sweep,
“Lanning, take it!”
 Dr. Alfred Lanning viewed the proceedings with faint scorn -- his usual reaction
to the doings of the vastly better-paid business and sales divisions. His unbelievable gray
eyebrows hunched low and his voice was dry:
 “From a scientific standpoint the situation, while not entirely clear, is subject to
intelligent analysis. The question of interstellar travel under present conditions of
physical theory is... uh... vague. The matter is wide open -- and the information given by
Consolidated to its thinking machine, assuming these we have to be the same, was
similarly wide open. Our mathematical department has given it a thorough analysis, and
it seems Consolidated has included everything. Its material for submission contains all
known developments of Franciacci’s space-warp theory, and, apparently, all pertinent
astrophysical and electronic data. It’s quite a mouthful.”
 Robertson followed anxiously. He interrupted, “Too much for The Brain to
handle?”
 Lanning shook his head decisively, “No. There are no known limits to The
Brain’s capacity. It’s a different matter. It’s a question of the Robotic Laws. The Brain,
for instance, could never supply a solution to a problem set to it if that solution, would
involve the death or injury of humans. As far as it would be concerned, a problem with
only such a solution would be insoluble. If such a problem is combined with an extremely
urgent demand that it be answered, it is just possible that The Brain, only a robot after all,
would be presented with a dilemma, where it could neither answer nor refuse to answer.
Something of the sort must have happened to Consolidated’s machine.”
 He paused, but the general manager urged on, “Go ahead, Dr. Tanning. Explain it
the way you explained it to me.”
 Lanning set his lips and raised his eyebrows in the direction of Dr. Susan Calvin
who lifted her eyes from her precisely folded hands for the first time. Her voice was low
and colorless.
 “The nature of a robot reaction to a dilemma is startling,” she began. “Robot
psychology is far from perfect -- as a specialist, I can assure you of that but it can be
discussed in qualitative terms, because with all the complications introduced into a
robot’s positronic brain, it is built by humans and is therefore built according to human
values.
 “Now a human caught in an impossibility often responds by a retreat from reality:
by entry into a world of delusion, or by taking to drink, going off into hysteria, or
jumping off a bridge. It all comes to the same thing -- a refusal or inability to face the
situation squarely. And so, the robot, a dilemma at its mildest will disorder half its relays;
and at its worst it will burn out every positronic brain path past repair.”
 “I see,” said Robertson, who didn’t. “Now what about this information
Consolidated’s wishing on us?”
 “It undoubtedly involves,” said Dr. Calvin, “a problem of a forbidden sort. But
The Brain is considerably different from Consolidated’s robot.”
 “That’s right, chief. That’s right.” The general manager was energetically
interruptive. “I want you to get this, because it’s the whole point of the situation.”
 Susan Calvin’s eyes glittered behind the spectacles, and she continued patiently,
“You see, sir, Consolidated’s machines, their Super-Thinker among them, are built
without personality. They go in for functionalism, you know -- they have to, without U.
S. Robot’s basic patents for the emotional brain paths. Their Thinker is merely a
calculating machine on a grand scale, and a dilemma ruins it instantly.
 “However, The Brain, our own machine, has a personality -- a child’s personality.
It is a supremely deductive brain, but it resembles an idiot savant. It doesn’t really
understand what it does -- it just does it. And because it is really a child, it is more
resilient. Life isn’t so serious, you might say.”
 The robopsychologist continued: “Here is what we’re going to do. We have
divided all of Consolidated’s information into logical units. We are going to feed the
units to The Brain singly and cautiously. When the factor enters -- the one that creates the
dilemma -- The Brain’s child personality will hesitate. Its sense of judgment is not
mature. There will be a perceptible interval before it will recognize a dilemma as such.
And in that interval, it will reject the unit automatically -- before its brainpaths can be set